---
layout: post
title:  "A practical overview on Architecture Decision Records (ADR)"
subtitle: "How to start and why this could be your most valuable action as a software architect"
tags: [software architecture, diagrams]
imgs-path: /assets/img/adr/
cover-img: /assets/img/adr/cover.jpg
permalink: /adr/
---

{: .toc .toc-title}
- [Something about the architecture decisional process](#something-about-the-architecture-decisional-process)
- [Tracking the knowledge](#tracking-the-knowledge)
- [Enpowering the team culture](#enpowering-the-team-culture)
- [A matter of responsibility](#a-matter-of-responsibility)
- [Additional advantages](#additional-advantages)
- [What's an ADR](#whats-an-adr)
- [How is it structured](#how-is-it-structured)
- [Why it's important](#why-its-important)
- [Who should be in charge of tracking ADRs?](#who-should-be-in-charge-of-tracking-adrs)
- [References](#references)
- [TLDR](#tldr)

I have been using ADRs for some years.  
In this article I'll try to give an introduction, share my feedback, and encourage you to start writing them if you already don't.

Before going deep into considerations and tips, it's useful to clarify the discussion giving a quick definition:  
*An ADR is simply a concise document that explains **why** something is going to be made **this way***.

That said, without adding other details and best practices, let's step back to the beginning.

# Something about the architecture decisional process

Taking architecture decisions is tough.  
It can be the result of a bunch of technical and non-technical evaluations, made of tricky balances between technology, cost, time, and stakeholders' requests.

The final decision may seem like a small thing, but a lot of work may have been required to come to that decision.  

In a nutshell, the point is hit by the "*Second Law of Software Architecture*", that states:
> **Why is more important than how**.

If you are curious about the first law, I can only recommend you to get and read the great book [Fundamentals of Software Architecture](http://fundamentalsofsoftwarearchitecture.com) written by Mark Richards & Neal Ford.

# Tracking the knowledge 

Architecture decisions are pieces of *knowledge*, among the most important, in my opinion.  
People moves between teams and companies, and it's important not to lose that knowledge when someone leaves the team.  
On the other side, when a new member joins the team, they will face exactly the same lack of knowledge, and for sure they will ask themselves: *"Why the hell the system was designed in this way?"*.  
We developers are opinionated guys, and an *architecture decisions log* can be a great way to share knowledge and prevent frustrations.  
When given to new team members it can be a really powerful document, whose reading can save days, during the onboarding process.

# Enpowering the team culture

Writing down architecture decisions is the first fundamental step to make them first-class entities in the teamwork final result.  
It's the most structured way to align *officially* the whole team about the work behind important decisions.  
If the team is big, it can reduce the distance between *design* and *development*. In this way everybody can understand decisions that otherwise, from the bottom, without an overall view, could seem incomprehensible.
Tracking decisions is also something that contributes positively to the team culture, because between the lines it says *"for this team the design counts"*.

# A matter of responsibility

As a software architect or technical leader, one of your most important responsibilities is taking these decisions. Not writing them down could dangerously suggest that things are happening without a reason, driven by pure istinct or worse randomly.  
Your decisions could have an impact for many years, even if you will leave the project. It's a matter of professionality, seriousness, and respect for those who will deal with the system in the future.  
Also, in the future, the ability to go back to old decisions and understand why there were taken, has many advantages:
- You will have the possibility to remember details that for sure you will have forgotten.
- If the decision, seen from the new context, will still appear as a good decision, good news for your self-esteem. You have been forward-looking or at least you're a lucky person.
- If it will seem a bad decision, well, you will have the possibility to go deep into it, and you will be able to make a retrospective and understand what happened:
  - **Option 1:** The context will be completely different, but you can say that *in that context* it was the best option, or at least a good one. You did your job well. After all you were not paid to be a fortune-teller.
  - **Option 2:** The context will be pretty much the same, but you will have collected more information, that in the past you didn't have, and that will have changed your perspective. Next time you will be more accurate, lesson learned.
  - **Option 3:** The context will be exactly the same, and at that point it will be official: you made a mistake. Anyway, you'll have a document that shows that you did your best. In any case you can learn by your mistakes, and you are a better professional now. 

# Additional advantages

Usually inside an ADR are also documented, in a more or less detailed fashion, the findings from investigations explored but not implemented. Describing the option that you are identifying as the best one, it's almost inevitable to explain also why you think that the other options are not so good.  
This information can have a huge value in the future, but is frequently lost, because there are no evident and direct reasons to track a solution that seems inappropriate.  

# What's an ADR

An ADR is simply a short document that explains the reasons behind an architectural decision.  


# How is it structured



# Why it's important



# Who should be in charge of tracking ADRs?


# References


# TLDR
xxxxxxx

Generally speaking we can say that:
- The more the project is complex, the more a single decision can produce impacts elsewhere in the system.  
- The more time has passed, the more the context is changed and the decision may be difficult to understand.  
- The more options are on the table, the more the decision is complex to be taken
