---
title: "S3"
subtitle: "Simple Storage Service"
is-folder: false
subcategory: storage
sequence: 1
layout: aws_study_guide_page
---

{: .toc .toc-title}
- [Concepts](#concepts)
  - [**Buckets**](#buckets)
  - [Limitations](#limitations)
  - [**Region**](#region)
  - [**Versioning**](#versioning)
- [Object facets](#object-facets)
- [**Cross-Origin Resource Sharing**](#cross-origin-resource-sharing)
- [Storage classes](#storage-classes)
- [**Archive storage classes**](#archive-storage-classes)
- [**Data Consistency Model**](#data-consistency-model)
- [**Encryption**](#encryption)
  - [**Server-Side Encryption (SSE)**](#server-side-encryption-sse)
  - [**Client-Side Encryption**](#client-side-encryption)
- [**Access Control**](#access-control)
  - [**Bucket Policies and User Policies**](#bucket-policies-and-user-policies)
  - [**Presigned URLs / Query String Authentication**](#presigned-urls--query-string-authentication)
- [**Other features**](#other-features)
  - [**Hosting a Static Website**](#hosting-a-static-website)
  - [**MFA Delete**](#mfa-delete)
  - [Cross-Region Replication](#cross-region-replication)
  - [VPC Endpoints](#vpc-endpoints)
  - [**Amazon S3 Transfer Acceleration**](#amazon-s3-transfer-acceleration)
  - [**Multipart Uploads**](#multipart-uploads)
  - [**Range GETs**](#range-gets)
- [Object Lifecycle Management](#object-lifecycle-management)


# Concepts

`http://{bucketname}.s3.amazonaws.com/{objectname}`

## **Buckets**

A _bucket_ is a **container for objects** stored in Amazon S3.\
Every object is contained in a bucket.\
You can think of a bucket in traditional terminology similar to a drive or volume.

## Limitations

* Maximum limit of **100 buckets** per account.
* **Unlimited** number of **objects**
* An object can only be up to **5 TB in size.**
* The largest objects uploaded in a **single PUT** is **5 GB**.\
  For objects larger than 100 MB, you should consider using **multipart upload**
* A bucket is owned by the AWS account that created it, and bucket ownership is not transferable.
* A bucket must be **empty before** you can **delete** it.
* After a bucket is deleted, that name becomes available to reuse, but the name might not be available for you to reuse for various reasons, if you expect to use same bucket name, do not delete the bucket.
* A bucket **name must be unique** across all existing bucket names in Amazon S3 **across all of AWS.**

## **Region**

Amazon S3 creates buckets in a region that you specify.
Objects belonging to a bucket that you create in a specific Region never leave that region unless you explicitly transfer them to another region.

## **Versioning**

You can use versioning to preserve, retrieve, and restore **every version** of every object stored in your Amazon S3 bucket, including recovering deleted objects.\
With versioning, you can easily recover from both **unintended user actions** and **application failures**.

{: .box-warning}
Once you enable versioning on a bucket, it can **never return** to an unversioned state.
You can, however, suspend versioning.

# Object facets

* **Key**\
  Name that you assign to an object, which may include a simulated folder structure. Each key must be **unique** within a bucket (unless the bucket has versioning turned on).
* **Version ID**\
Within a bucket, a **key+**_**versionID**_ uniquely identify an object.\
If **versioning** is turned **off**, you have only a **single** version.\
If **versioning** is turned **on**, you may have **multiple** versions of a stored object.
* **Value** \
Actual content that you are storing, any sequence of bytes.
* **Metadata** \
A set of **name-value pairs** to store information regarding the object.\
AWS assigns **system metadata** to these objects, and you can assign custom metadata, referred to as _**user-defined metadata**_.
* **Subresources** \
Is a mechanism to store additional object-specific information:\
  - **Access control list (ACL):** A list of grants identifying the grantees and the permissions granted
  - **Torrent:** The torrent file associated with the specific object
* **Access Control Information**\
Supports both _resource-based access control_, such as an ACL and _bucket policies_, and _user-based access control_.
*   **Object Tagging**
    _Object tagging_ enables you to categorize storage.\
    Each tag is a key-value pair.\
    \- Keys and values are case sensitive.\
    \- Max 10 tags per object\
    \- Tag keys must be unique\
    \- _Tag key_ can be up to 128 Unicode characters in length\
    \- _Tag value_ can be up to 256 Unicode characters in length

# **Cross-Origin Resource Sharing**

Defines a way for client web applications that are loaded in one domain to interact with resources in a different domain. With CORS support in Amazon S3, you can selectively **allow cross-origin access** to your S3 resources while avoiding the need to use a proxy.

# Storage classes

S3 Storage Classes can be configured **at the object level** and a single bucket can contain objects stored across S3 Standard, S3 Intelligent-Tiering, S3 Standard-IA, and S3 One Zone-IA.

* **S3 Standard**\
  Scope: **Region**\
  Durability: **11** 9s (99.999999999%)\
  Availability: **4** 9s (99.99%)   (over a given year)\
  Replicated **3 times** in **3 AZ**
* **S3 Intelligent-Tiering** \
  Automatically moves objects to the most cost-effective access tier based on access frequency.\
  \- Objects not accessed for 30 days -> Infrequent Access tier (40% lower cost)\
  \- Objects not accessed for 90 days -> Archive Instant Access tier (68% lower cost)
* **S3 Standard-Infrequent Access** \[S3 Standard-IA]\
  Lower cost per GB stored and GB retrieval. \
  High cost per PUT, COPY, POST or GET request 30-day storage minimum\
  Availability: **3** 9s (99.9%)
* **S3 One Zone-Infrequent Access** \[S3 One Zone-IA]\
  Non critical data, infrequent but rapid access (cost 20% less than S3-IA)\
Scope: **AZ**\
Availability: **2.5** 9s (99.5%)\
Data replicated **3 times** in the **same AZ**

# **Archive storage classes**

* **S3 Glacier Instant Retrieval**\
Lowest-cost storage for long-lived data rarely accessed that requires retrieval in milliseconds.\
(cost 68% less than S3 Standard-IA)\
Availability: **3** 9s (99.9%)\
Minimum object size: 128 KB&#x20;
* **S3 Glacier Flexible Retrieval** (Formerly S3 Glacier)\
Ideal for archiving data that is accessed 1-2 times per year, asynchronously.\
Retrieval times: from minutes to hours, configurable\
(cost 10% less than S3 Glacier Instant Retrieval)\
Availability: **4** 9s (99.99%)&#x20;
* **S3 Glacier Deep Archive**\
Lowest-cost storage class, for data that may be accessed 1-2 times per year.\
Designed for customers that must retain data for many years to meet regulatory compliance requirements.\
Retrieval time: 12 hours\

# **Data Consistency Model**

S3 provides **read-after-write** consistency **only** for **PUTs** of **new objects.**

Amazon S3 offers **eventual consistency** for **overwrite PUTs** and **DELETEs** in all regions, and updates to a single key are atomic.&#x20;

{: .box-warning}
If you need a strongly consistent data store, choose a different data store than Amazon S3 or add code consistency checks into your application.

# **Encryption**

You can protect data _**in transit**_ by using Amazon S3 SSL API endpoints, which ensures that all data sent **to and from** S3 is encrypted using the _**HTTPS** protocol_ while in transit.

You can encrypt data _**at rest**_ using different options of _Server-Side Encryption (SSE)_.\
Your objects in Amazon S3 are **encrypted at the object level** as they are written to disk in the data centers and then decrypted for you when you access the objects using AES-256.

## **Server-Side Encryption (SSE)**

There are 3, mutually exclusive options:

* **SSE-S3 (Amazon S3 managed keys)**\
  - Each object is encrypted with a unique data key.\
  - This key is encrypted with a periodically-rotated master key managed by Amazon S3.\
  - AES-256 is used for both object and master keys.\
  This feature is offered at no additional cost beyond what you pay for using Amazon S3.
* **SSE-C (Customer-provided keys)** \
  You can use your own encryption key while uploading an object to Amazon S3.\
  This encryption key is used by S3 to encrypt your data using AES-256.\
  After the object is encrypted, the encryption key you supplied is deleted.\
  When you retrieve this object you must provide the same encryption key in your request. \
  S3 verifies that the encryption key matches, decrypts the object, and returns the object.\
  This feature is also offered at no additional cost beyond what you pay for using Amazon S3.
* **SSE-KMS (AWS KMS managed encryption keys)**\
  When you upload your object:\
  \- A request is sent to AWS KMS to create an _object key_.\
  \- KMS generates this _object key_ and encrypts it using the _master key_ that you specified earlier. - KMS returns this encrypted _object key_ along with the _plaintext object key_ to Amazon S3. \
  \- The S3 web server encrypts your object using the _plaintext object key._\
  - Stores the now encrypted object.\
  - Deletes the plaintext object key from memory.\
  When you download an object:\
  - A request is sent to AWS KMS to decrypt an _object key_.\
  - KMS decrypts the _object key_ using the _master key_ and returns the _plaintext object_ key.\
  - With the plaintext object key, Amazon S3 decrypts the encrypted object and returns it to you. \
  This feature does incur an additional charge.

## **Client-Side Encryption**

You can also use **client-side encryption**, with which you encrypt the objects before uploading to Amazon S3 and then decrypt them after you have downloaded them.\
For extra protection you can use a combination of both server-side and client-side encryption.

There are 2options for using data encryption keys.

*   **Client-Side Master Key**

    The first option is to use a _client-side master key_ of your own.\
    When uploading an object, you provide a client-side _master key_ to the Amazon S3 encryption client (for example, _AmazonS3EncryptionClient_ when using the AWS SDK for Java).
* **AWS KMS-Managed Customer Master Key (CMK)**\
  This process is similar to the process described for using KMS-SSE, except that it is used for data at rest instead of data in transit.

# **Access Control**

By **default**, all S3 resources are **private**.\
Only the resource owner, an account that created it, can access the resource.

There are two access policy options to grant permissions to your Amazon S3 resources.\
Both use a JSON-based access policy language, as do all AWS services that use policies.

## **Bucket Policies and User Policies**

* **Bucket Policies** \
  A _bucket policy_ is **attached to S3 buckets**, and can allow or deny requests based on the elements in the policy, including the requester, S3 actions, resources, and aspects or conditions of the request (for example, the IP address used to make the request).
* **IAM User Policies**\
  A _user policy_ is **attached to IAM users** to perform or not perform actions on your AWS resources.

## **Presigned URLs / Query String Authentication**

A _presigned URL_ is **a way to grant access** to an object, allowing users to upload or download it **without granting** them **direct access** to Amazon S3 or the account.

Anyone with **valid security credentials** can create a presigned URL, but must be someone with **permission** to perform the operation granted.&#x20;

Can be generated with the AWS CLI or SDKs, and not with in the Management Console.

```
https://s3.amazonaws.com/examplebucket/test.txt

?X-Amz-Algorithm=AWS4-HMAC-SHA256
&X-Amz-Credential=<your-access-key-id>/20130721/us-east-1/s3/aws4_request
&X-Amz-Date=20130721T201207Z
&X-Amz-Expires=86400
&X-Amz-SignedHeaders=host
&X-Amz-Signature=<signature-value>
```

* The line feeds are added for readability.
* The X-Amz-Credential value in the URL shows the / character only for readability. In practice, it should be encoded as %2F.

# **Other features**

## **Hosting a Static Website**

If your website contains static content and optionally client-side scripts, then you can host your _static website_ directly in Amazon S3 without the use of web-hosting servers.

To host a static website, you configure an Amazon S3 bucket for website hosting and upload your website content to the bucket.&#x20;

## **MFA Delete**

_MFA_ is another way to control deletes on your objects in Amazon S3.\
It does so by adding **another layer of protection** against unintentional or malicious deletes, requiring an authorized request against Amazon S3 to delete the object.

## Cross-Region Replication

_Cross-region replication_ (CRR) is a bucket-level configuration that enables automatic, **asynchronous copying** of objects across buckets in different AWS Regions.\
The _source_ bucket and _destination_ bucket can be owned by different accounts.

To activate this feature, add a replication configuration to your _source_ bucket to direct Amazon S3 to replicate objects according to the configuration.\
In the replication configuration, provide information including the following:\
\- The destination bucket\
\- The objects that need to be replicated\
\- Optionally, the destination storage class (otherwise the source storage class will be used)\
All data is **encrypted in transit** across AWS Regions using SSL.\
A replcated object cannot be replicated again.\
Versioning must be enabled for both the source and destination buckets.\
Source and destination buckets must be in different AWS Regions.\
Amazon S3 must be granted appropriate permissions to replicate files.

## VPC Endpoints

Enables you to connect your VPC privately to Amazon S3 without requiring an internet gateway, _network address translation (NAT)_ device, _virtual private network (VPN)_ connection, or _AWS Direct Connect_ connection.\
Instances in your VPC do not require public IP addresses to communicate with the resources in the service. Traffic between your VPC and Amazon S3 does not leave the Amazon network.

## **Amazon S3 Transfer Acceleration**

_It's_ a feature that optimizes throughput when transferring larger objects across larger geographic distances, leveraging CloudFront _edge locations_ to assist you in uploading your objects more quickly in cases where you are closer to an edge location than to the region to which you are transferring your files.

Instead of using the public internet to upload objects from Southeast Asia, across the globe to Northern Virginia, take advantage of the global _Amazon content delivery network_ (CDN).&#x20;

## **Multipart Uploads**

The multipart upload API enables you to upload large objects in parts, to speed up your upload by doing so in parallel.

To use multipart upload, you first **break the object** into smaller parts, parallelize the **upload**, and then **submit a manifest file** telling Amazon S3 that all parts of the object have been uploaded. Amazon S3 will then **assemble** all of those individual pieces **to a single object**.

Multipart upload can be used for objects ranging from **5 MB to 5 TB** in size.

## **Range GETs**

_Range GETs_ are similar to multipart uploads, but in reverse.\
If you are downloading a large object and tracking the offsets, use range GETs to **download the object as multiple parts** instead of a single part.\
You can then download those parts in parallel and potentially see an improvement in performance.



# Object Lifecycle Management

A _lifecycle configuration_ is a set of rules that defines actions that Amazon S3 applies to a group of objects.\
There are two types of actions:

* **Transition actions** \
  Define when objects transition to another storage class
* **Expiration actions** \
  Define when objects expire. Amazon S3 deletes expired objects on your behalf.

